---
layout: faq
title:  "Will I lose control?"
target: 3
---
**Hypnosis cannot make you do or say or be anything you do not want to**. Indeed, all hypnosis is really just self-hypnosis; the therapist’s job being no more than that of a guide or facilitator. **If you wanted to get up and walk out, you could**. Even the clucking chickens on stage know that they are walking about clucking like chickens, much to the amusement of those in the audience. But if they so chose, they could stop, sit down and say “I just don’t feel like being a clucking chicken today”! However, the process of hypnosis **may bring to the surface a painful or frightening memory**. As the subconscious cannot distinguish between what is real and what is imagined, the memory will likely produce the emotions that were attached to it, as if the event were repeating itself in the present time. Hypnotherapy uses techniques to help the Client deal with this kind of scenario arising. However, my personal belief is that whatever has happened in our lives, we survived it; it did not kill us! We have therefore lived through it at least once – often many times in our memories. The idea of hypnotherapy is to **free the Client from the ties that bind him or her to that painful or frightening memory**, so that they may lead a more fulfilling life that isn’t plagued with negativity and worry. I therefore seek to provide a **safe, confidential, non-judgemental space** for the Client to achieve this. 

**Rather than thinking of it as losing control, if anything, I think of it as the Client taking control to deal with their problem.**
