---
layout: faq
title:  "What happens in a typical session?"
target: 5
---
A typical session lasts between **one and a quarter and one and a half hours**. You will be invited to sit down in a comfy recliner and will be asked (in the first session) to complete a **confidential Client Form with some background information, details of any medication you may be taking and your desired goals**. We will then briefly discuss your problem and what you wish to change. I will explain the process of hypnosis, what to expect and answer any questions before inducing a relaxing hypnotic state. The relaxation will take around 12 minutes and will be followed by the therapy itself. **A range of different approaches and techniques may be used** depending on the client’s needs. I offer client-centred hypnotherapy which involves delivering appropriate scripts as well as using techniques to uncover and deal with root causes of unhelpful behaviours. You may be asked to indicate responses to questions with a finger movement or you may be asked to respond verbally. In both cases, you will remain deeply relaxed and feeling sleepy. Two key techniques that are used are Inner Child and Gestalt (cutting ties) therapy. These are powerful healing therapies and usually involve the client verbalising an imagined dialogue between themselves and another. If this is something you would rather not share audibly, you can conduct the dialogue in your head, with the same powerful results. **After each session, we will spend a few minutes discussing the session; the techniques used, what emerged and how the client is feeling**. Subsequent sessions will always begin with a review of what has changed since the last session.
